Thank you for joining
me and the Gaiam
studios in Boulder, Colorado.
I'm your host Regina Meredith.
Have you ever wondered why
some people appear to be hard
wired to handle the
challenges of life
while others completely
break down and freak out?
According to today's
guest, Joan Borysenko,
we all have the ability to find
resilience in changing times.
It just takes a better
understanding of the tools that
are required to bounce back.
In her book, "It's Not
The End Of The World",
Joan says it all.
And we have her here today.
And I know this may embarrass
you, but I was so impressed,
I had to bring it up.
Wayne Dyer says you're the
smartest woman he's ever met.
I know this probably
isn't the first time
that's been tossed back at you.
But I thought, if
she's that smart,
we have to talk to this woman.
Oh, my goodness, I love Wayne.
Well, clearly, he loves you.
Yes, we're friends
for a long time.
Well, I just wanted to
honor that little love fest.
But as we jump into
this conversation,
first of all, here you
all, you're put together.
You've done a lot of media.
You're poised and confident.
But that's not how
you started out.
In your early years, you
had a lot of challenges.
And you were not
particularly resilient.
And if you could tell us
what happened, in particular
maybe even speaking
of your father,
and I know that's a
very touching subject.
Yes.
Well, there were
two main things.
I had an experience
as a 10-year-old
with a minor stress.
We moved.
And it wasn't like we moved
from Boston to Kansas.
We moved 10 minutes
down the road.
That was it.
But it was another school zone.
And my response to that
was really quite terrible.
I developed obsessive
compulsive disorder.
And I started to hallucinate
really frightening
things, head hunters,
snakes, scorpions,
from a movie I'd seen.
Until I literally could
not tell the hallucinations
from reality.
And then came the symptoms
like having to take a glass
and turn it a certain number
of times in each direction
before you take a drink.
Truly obsessive compulsive.
I had a lot of
rituals like that.
All my reading had to
be done upside down,
backwards and
repeated three times.
Makes it kind of hard
to read anything.
Where did you pick up that one?
Who knows?
You know it just-- they come.
Why do people with that
syndrome almost all have
the hand washing obsession.
In any case, it got me very
interested in brain science.
But I recovered
through what we would
call a spontaneous remission.
But you know if you ask
anybody who ever had
a spontaneous remission
from anything, Regina,
they all have some
interesting story.
And it involves a complete
change of consciousness
and suddenly looking at
things with new eyes.
And that's what happened.
I sat down after about
six months of this,
and I said, I better pray.
I was not a prayerful kid.
My family didn't pray.
But you know when you're
in a situation like that,
there's some natural movement
to say, well, if there's
any help out there, help.
Was it a problem for you?
I mean were you feeling
that this was something
that needed to be corrected?
Or not just your
family, you actually
felt the pain of your disorder.
I lived in a state
of constant terror.
Because my fear was if I was
interrupted during a ritual,
these nightmare horrors
that I was hallucinating
would come to life
in the living room
and kill my parents
and my brother.
So it was a state of
perpetual terror day
and night without
any letup whatsoever.
And there was no
help from psychiatry.
My parents tried, but
this was over 50 years ago
when I was 10.
There was no Clonopin, no
Prozac, no behavior therapy.
Really nothing.
So I sat to pray.
And I had what I had
no context for, which
was a spiritual experience.
The intense fear dissipated.
And suddenly I felt a
connection to something
much larger that was
totally safe, completely
loving, and all wise.
And it was-- I mean when
you've been terrified,
I can't even begin to
express what that's like.
And I had a knowing in this
state that I could recover
and a download about
how to go about it.
And within three days, the
entire episode was finished.
What a gift.
And well, it was a gift.
And sometimes I think for
many people, the darkest hour
of your life, and the
most terrible thing
that you could go through
turns out later to be a gift.
And it's all part of really
like the hero's journey.
You have something that
completely separates you
from reality as you know it.
Trauma.
And then you're free.
You open up at another level if
you've got some good guidance
particularly.
And that got me
interested in resilience.
And certainly I didn't
know that word at 10.
But it got me interested in
understanding brain science.
How could you be normal
one minute, completely
in an altered reality,
a terrible one,
and then a few days later,
come back to normal reality?
And then it got me interested
in the spiritual journey.
Because although I had no
context for an experience
like that of really
cosmic consciousness,
I knew it had to be spiritual.
And so all my life, I've
explored the world's religions.
Mysticism, the saints, just
been very, very interesting.
Well, after such an
enlightening experience
that would be the
logical place to look.
And let me ask you something.
I saw you a couple weeks
ago in Nevada City.
And as I was dialing in,
I think you were talking
at one point about the
ability-- when you were young,
you were actually seeing beyond
the veil into other areas.
You know I've had a number of
experiences throughout my life
when I've had a peek into
a reality other than this.
Several times when I was
young, but particularly,
that experience.
Because you read in texts that
everything's made out of light.
The physicists tell you,
it's made out of light.
And I would have these moments
when I could actually see it.
I could see that
matter was energy,
and everything was
made out of light.
And as an adult, I've
had that many times
in states of lucid dreaming.
And in what Raymond Moody calls
an empathic death experience
where you're not
the one who's dying,
but you're with a
loved one who's dying.
And when they go into
the light, you also go.
Both my son and I had that
experience when my mother died.
And so I'm fortunate because
in terms of resilience,
for example, part of the
characteristic of resilience
is that you have
faith in something.
It doesn't necessarily
mean faith in God
or faith in something specific.
But I have a great deal of
faith that this universe
is a friendly place.
That was the big question
of Albert Einstein.
How wonderful to have
that understanding
at a very young age.
-Yes.
I mean was that enough
of a companion to you
that it really did skew the
way you approached the rest
of your life after that?
Yes and no.
You know you can have
an experience like that
and still get frightened.
You can forget.
I think we forget
very frequently
things that would help us.
And what it was is it set a
place for me of remembering.
And then it's taken a number
of difficult experiences
over the lifetime before I've
become much more established
in that place of resilience.
I read that book "A
Gradual Awakening"
with Steven Levine
years ago, and I think
that's, for me, what it's been.
So you ultimately grew up.
We're going to fast
forward a little bit, well,
"The Autobiography Of
A Yogi" also factored
in there, in your teenage
years, as I recall.
It did.
So this took you further
down the spiritual path
of understanding.
But, ultimately, you had to
contend with medical school.
Well, you know, what
I had decided was this.
I decided I would
not be a physician.
That I would be a researcher.
Because I was very
interested in neuroscience.
I was very interested,
well, I'll get to the cancer
part of my interest later.
But I decided I was mostly
interested in the mind.
And the pharmacology department
at Harvard Medical School
was involved in the very
first biofeedback experiments.
Where I mean this was
big news in the '60.
-Absolutely.
-Very big news.
How is it that you could take an
unconscious process like blood
pressure and make it
conscious and learn to modify
your own physical responses?
That was really big news.
We knew about that from yoga.
But it was scientific.
And I chose Harvard
Medical School because I
was very interested in that.
And I ended up, I
have a doctorate
from Harvard in cell biology.
And then being an overacheiver--
As you are.
I did three more post docs.
Because you are the smartest
person Wayne Dyer has ever met.
That's I think what he meant.
I have a post-doctoral
fellowship
in cancer cell biology.
And I ran a big, active lab for
years funded by the National
Cancer Institute and
taught first at Tufts
Medical School then at Harvard.
And then two more post-docs.
One in the almost
unpronounceable
word of psychoneuroimmunology.
You are an overachiever.
But I'm glad.
I'm glad for that.
Because explain that to us.
Well,
psychoneuroimmunology means
the pathways through which our
thinking turns into hormones,
turns into molecules
of emotion turns
into brain activity
that ultimately
changes the immune system.
For example, why does
stress compromise immunity?
And I have been absolutely
fascinated in that.
And then in the opposite,
why does love enhance
and balance your immune system?
And so I have loved doing
that kind of research.
And then finally my third
post-doc was in the field
called behavioral medicine.
And that is how do you
take all these findings
and make them
relevant to our lives?
What do you do when
somebody's come in
and they're traumatized or
they're going through a really
difficult period to help them
calm down their nervous system
and find the means
for resilience.
So that's the work I've
done for many years.
That's a lot of work.
And I mean the
wonderful thing about it
is by taking these
challenges on academically,
you were able to connect a
tremendous number of dots
that other people in any one of
those disciplines would miss.
And I think really that's
the gift of your work.
You write about these various
modalities that we can use
and tools in a very
approachable way.
But the fact is we
have all of the benefit
of this academic discipline
behind you and connecting
the dots because you've
had these experiences
spiritually as well.
So after you go
through all of that,
I want to ask one question.
And that is what did you come
to find about what science
and medicine even in these
very forward thinking
programs simply didn't
understand about the human mind
and emotions?
Well, you know science
is based on the ability
to measure things.
And so the first
thing that comes up
is a question like this.
If you truly think that
the mind is non-local.
That's a term that Larry
Darcy, a wonderful physician,
coined I think back in 1988 in
his book "Recovering The Soul".
And he said, the
mind, essentially,
is infinite, immortal, eternal.
And he showed all kinds
of evidence for this.
People who can see what's
happening at a distance.
I've had many
experiences like that.
As a young mother, for example,
I was riding in the car.
And suddenly I felt
a tug right here,
right where the thymus is.
And I saw a vision of the
pressure cooker exploding
and the hot liquid
from it burning
my son who was in a playpen.
He was about a year
old, 14 months old.
And sure enough I went home.
And I found he had been burned.
My husband took him to the
doctor and all of that.
But what is that about?
That empathic connection.
It speaks to the
fact that information
flows at some level that's
not localized to your brain.
That's what Larry means.
It's non-local.
It's spread out there.
And if we all have access to
that field of information,
kind of a greater mind,
then that's amazing.
And it has to change the way
that you look at the brain.
And instead of the brain
creating all of that,
it's more like a
television set that's
the receiver for this
information that is broadcast
and into which you broadcast.
Now there have been some
scientific studies, which
of course we can get
into to look at that,
but by and large
scientists will cross
their eyeballs if you start
to bring up topics like this.
And it's always good as
a scientist to be humble
and to realize that most of
medicine is based on anecdotes,
is based on putting together
stories from different sources
about what worked.
And much of what's central
to the canon of medicine
has never been proved.
We don't understand
the mechanism.
Exactly.
It was like, what,
20, 25 years ago
that we finally figured
out why aspirin worked.
And so not understanding
something is not
proof that it doesn't exist.
Yes, thank you very much.
And that's a missing piece
because a lot of people
will not trust in their own
instincts and intuition,
nor in other practitioners
that are perfectly
valid in their abilities to help
them in their healing process
because it doesn't have the
Harvard stamp of approval
on it.
Or it hasn't been validated
by someone like you.
For example, with
your background.
But the reality is, well, I
want to get into something
you mentioned a moment ago.
This empathy is really
driven by emotions.
And a lot of what we're talking
about in terms of the field
and our connection to each
other, this non-local field,
is much more driven by
emotion than I think
was thought until very recently.
I think that's
very interesting.
And it's like when people look
at things like prayer studies.
Some of them work.
Some of them don't work.
And people throw up
their hands and say well,
it must be nothing.
And I think that's
because certain studies
are really hard to do.
If I were to say, OK, pray for
Regina's toenail over whatever.
There's no connection if I've
just put that out to a group.
They don't know who you are.
But if you're a person
that I love and I cherish.
And when I think of you,
I can see your healing.
That's very different.
And so those kinds
of studies are
difficult to do in
large enough numbers
to reach statistical
significance.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I just wanted to read this.
This is out of your book, or
maybe it was out of your talk.
I forget now.
Because I blended them.
But you mentioned, there's one
particular quote that says,
the mind is a self
organizing process
that shapes how
information and energy
moves across time and space.
That is so elegant.
It is.
And this is actually
a direct quote
from a psychiatrist, Dan Siegel,
who started the Mindsight
Institute at UCLA.
And it's such a broad
view of the mind.
And what's interesting about
that definition, Regina,
is that it was agreed upon by
a large number of scientists
that he brought together in
diverse fields from sociology
to psychology to
mathematics to physics.
And if you think about that, the
field of information which is--
Like a processing unit.
Yeah, and it's self organizing.
And that information
is out there.
That's interesting
because I've heard a lot of
and read a lot of
esoteric material
that speaks about the
memory and our experience
not being in our
physical brains.
This is somehow
accessing a larger field.
Some people would refer
to it as the aura.
Some kind of personal
matrix of energy that stores
our personal information.
Others would say it's
larger than that.
And it's part of a universal
matrix of information
that simultaneously
exists in time and space
you know backward and forward.
And so when you start
looking at this,
we realize the mind has
incredible abilities not only
in terms of understanding
the matrix we live in,
but in terms of healing.
We have a lot to work with
that we didn't realize
we had even just a decade ago.
Well, we do.
And I think it's
quite fascinating
to watch the emergence
of new fields
like energy medicine
and energy psychology.
And once again it's somewhat
hard to study but not entirely.
There are some studies
on therapeutic touch
where you're not
touching the person.
But what you have is an
intention for compassion.
I think that's the
important thing.
That's that empathy that
you were talking about,
that emotional connection.
And, for example,
one of those studies
showed a change in the immune
system of the person being
treated but a similar
change in the person
who was giving the treatment.
So both of them.
Both of them moved
into some kind of field
of health because of that.
And what we need, of course, is
more experiments of this sort.
There's been enough that at most
hospitals around the country
now, you have divisions
of complementary medicine
where, for example, some nurse
will come in and actually do
therapeutic or healing touch.
And the patient is getting
all of the other treatments
as well.
But that's added on.
And I'd really like to see that.
Now we need really basic changes
like good food in hospitals.
Good food and all that.
Little bit of sunlight
and fresh air.
That wouldn't hurt.
In fact, many years ago,
I was shooting a story,
this was in the mid 80s, at
the Wegman Clinic outside
of Dornach, Switzerland,
which was very much associated
with anthroposophical medicine,
Rudolf Steiner's work, Waldorf
schools and all of that.
And I mean you almost wanted
to become ill just to be
able to enjoy that facility.
I'm joking.
But I mean, again, you're
talking about everything
that lifts the human spirit.
They had artwork.
They went into these
amazing color therapy rooms,
where you sat and
the entire room was
cycled through various colors.
Which then they would
test you afterwards
to see the resiliency
of your immune system
based on how you were
reacting to these colors.
You had music, fabulous food,
every room had a little garden.
I mean it was really,
you started seeing
the real elements that heal us.
And this was for
cancer specifically.
Well, you know absolutely.
There was a study done in really
a very prestigious journal, I
think it was actually
published in "Science",
and it's been out
for a long time.
It must be a 15-year-old study.
But it just looked at people who
had a certain kind of surgery
and what their hospital
room looked like.
If your room looked
out on nature,
you got out of the hospital
roughly a day sooner
and needed less pain
medication than if you
looked at a parking lot.
It's like, are we separate
from the environment, no.
We're part of it.
You know, I'm looking,
there's a beautiful plant
in the corner of this room.
There's a beautiful
arrangement of succulents.
And it's much different than if
I was looking at a wastebasket.
Yes, absolutely.
And not only that,
I mean probably
the most important factor is our
relationships with each other.
And our trust in each other.
And we know there have been many
studies done on placebo effect
and about the effect
of the person's trust
in the person that's
taking care of them.
And whether it's a
doctor or another kind
of health care provider.
Absolutely.
There's good evidence.
There is.
So we know that's true.
And I want you to
tell your story,
because I think it's hysterical,
about the bad doctor.
The person who lacked,
not only all empathy,
but was really just silly.
She was just silly.
And I think she was fried.
I told that story
in my book "Fried",
which is a book about why you
burn out and how to revive.
This is the best
example I've heard.
Health care professionals,
some 60% of physicians,
are burned out.
Which means that
they're exhausted
emotionally and physically.
Which means that they lose
the capacity for empathy.
They're just so, they
can't take anything else.
And, of course, their function,
their efficiency, what
they can do declines greatly.
And then they may be
substance abusing, who knows?
But I went to the doctor, this
is when I was working in Boston
at Tufts Medical School,
I go to the doctor
because I've pulled
a muscle in my back.
I've got two little kids.
You know you're schleping the
car seats and all of that.
And I'm a yoga teacher.
And I keep thinking,
oh, I better
lay off the yoga
because it's making
an inflammation in the injury.
So I go in, first queue
that something's wrong,
her office was and I swear
I'm not exaggerating,
it had to be in the mid 90's.
You'd think either
she was going to do
bikram yoga or roast
a flock of turkeys
in front of this space heater.
And she herself was
sitting in a heavy sweater
picking the little
balls off of it.
She didn't even look at me.
No energy.
Heat, picking balls off.
She could not make
any connection.
And finally I'm
like coaching her,
don't you want to examine me?
And like should I
stop doing yoga?
What should I do?
I said I think I've
sprained a muscle.
And at this point she perks
up, and she says, not so fast.
Maybe you have cancer.
I just love that.
That's the most
irresponsible medical story
I think I've ever heard.
Absolutely.
You know she was like
annoyed at the world.
And that's part of it.
She probably told everybody
that passed through the door
that they had cancer.
-Yes.
And, you know, I
thought, I know better.
My degree is in
cellular biology.
And I'm a cancer cell biologist,
and I've studied anatomy.
I know I don't have cancer.
But can you imagine what
the effect would be?
Oh, it would terrible.
Because she's in a
position of authority.
You've come to her
because she's supposed
to know what she's doing.
To tell you such
a horrible thing.
Imagine if you were an innocent
person that didn't have
your knowledge that came in.
What she could have spun into
motion inside their body.
You know Leonard Laskow?
I know who he is.
OK, because he's
written about that.
Where they did some
research out of Berkeley
on love and its effect
on cancer cells.
And the reversal of the cancer.
This woman was the
antithesis of that.
-She was.
-Oh, my goodness.
That's horrible.
Well, I want to pick it up with
the story of our resilience
and also another little
story on how bad news
can so dramatically
impact our immune system
to the point of death.
And we'll pick that story
up in just a minute.
We're going to just
take a little break.
We're back with Joan
Borysenko, and I
want to pick up the
conversation where we left off.
Another story you
told was about-- it
has to do with voodoo.
I mean truly voodoo.
Where someone can deliver some
really frightening or bad news,
or put out a really evil
intent, and another person
believes in that intent to
cause unimaginable damage.
Can you tell about that.
You know this was a fascination
of a mentor of mine, Herbert
Benson, who he was the
cardiologist who first studied
meditation and
found the physiology
of the relaxation response.
What it did to the body.
He was fascinated with
the placebo effect
and also with voodoo death.
Because if the placebo
effect is about healing,
voodoo death is about the
power of the mind to kill.
So for example, he found that
in certain tribes in Africa,
there was a tradition
where a medicine man
would curse you for something.
And if you were cursed, you'd
go into your sleeping quarters,
and there would be a
bone placed on your bed.
And this was called
pointing the bone.
And if people said, my god, the
bone has been pointed at me,
they would die
within a day's time.
This is really documented?
This is really documented.
But you know Viktor Frankl when
he wrote the most wonderful
book on resilience,
"Man's Search for Meaning"
told something really similar.
When people give up hope that's
the final common denominator,
you have no hope,
you're in a box
of I'm not going
to survive here,
you will die very frequently.
And so he noticed this in
the concentration camp.
That when people gave
up the will to live,
you knew right
away, he said they'd
smoke their own cigarettes.
Because those were a medium
of exchange in the camps.
And when that happened, they'd
sit on the edge of their bed,
and very often they'd kill
right over from a heart attack
or some other form
of vasospasm that
leads to rapid cardiac death.
And if that didn't
happen what would happen
were immune changes.
The stress was so
terrific that they'd
become open to the
next kind of epidemic,
maybe typhoid or cholera
that ravaged the camps.
Because the system is
already been reduced.
OK, well, I just wanted
you to share that.
It's a very stark, but I think
a very important point to make.
That that's how
powerful the mechanism
of fear and loss of hope is.
And now we're going to get to
the specifics of resilience
in your book.
And I wanted to go back to 2008.
You had your own shock.
And you say admittedly,
that in your lifetime,
you've often operated
on pessimism.
You know your first
response was to be
ugh, how do I deal with this?
That's right.
That's how I'm wired.
And probably most people
are wired that way.
So 2008.
Well, 2008, the
stock market crashed.
And, of course, I thought
to myself, well, that's it.
I'll never retire.
You lost a fair amount in that.
Well, I did.
You know, so many of us did.
And I had friends who lost
everything to Bernie Madoff.
There was a lot of
financial difficulty.
I went to a
conference, and I heard
a story from another speaker
about a friend of his
in his 30's who was a
broker on Wall Street
and whose response was
jumping out a window.
And I thought, I think I better
write a book on resilience.
Because the thing with
my own response in 2008
is that I can recognize
pessimistic thinking
for what it without taking
it necessarily so seriously.
Oh, that's some of the
movies that my mind
habitually creates.
I have the wiring
that does that.
But it's not the truth.
When I believe that.
I've left the world
of possibility.
And I've entered a
very narrow space.
I'm like thinking
in the box, and I
can't see my way out of it.
And I think everyone listening
to this relates to that.
Especially when you have learned
about something very suddenly.
Exactly.
Yes, exactly.
And your initial coping response
will be very much like it
was when you were a child.
That's what happens.
There's an instant regression.
But that's only the
beginning of the story.
It's not the end.
-Right.
And by the way, this happened
again to you in 2010.
We have fires going on
right now in Colorado.
And everybody knows
about that if they're
paying attention to the news.
But you had them a
couple years ago.
And you had a tremendous
amount of damage to your home.
We did.
It was called the Four
Mile Canyon Wildfire.
And I lived at the top of
Four Mile Canyon in Boulder.
169 homes were burned.
And many thousands of acres.
And we lost, we were at
the epicenter of the fire.
16 of our neighbors
were destroyed.
We thought our
house was destroyed.
But it took three or four
days to find the house
was standing, partly
burned, but standing.
One of our out
buildings had burned.
But many, many trees had burned.
And when we came back, it
looked like a lunar landscape.
Stinky, black shiny.
Your mean your neighbors gone.
And I thought, how
can we live here?
And we'll never sell it.
They sent out insurance
adjusters immediately.
And you saw the price of your
property drop by 50% overnight.
And you saw a lot of
your things disappear.
Yeah, you saw a
lot of your things.
And we lived in a house that
was empty for about six months.
Because they come to
clean up after the fire.
They take everything
out of your house.
Even your Christmas ribbons
go to the dry cleaner.
Very disorienting.
There's nothing left.
The walls are devoid of art.
There are no rugs.
So in two years time you had
two big psychological shocks
to your system.
But because of your
own work and also
what happened to your father.
Yes.
You know I mean that
was another story.
That's why I left
the laboratory.
Please explain just briefly
so we can get back to the book.
It's big.
Well, my father, in my
late 20's, my father,
very beloved father,
the most gentle,
compassionate, sweetest
man in the world,
found out that he had cancer.
And he was given a
drug that was helping
to keep the cancer in check.
But it created in him
a manic psychosis.
And it was like a stranger
had moved into his skin.
He got taken off that
drug for surgery.
And he clearly made a decision.
And that was that life was
not worth living like that.
And I woke up one morning
at 6 o'clock to a call
that he had jumped
out of the window
of their 36 story condominium.
And that was how
he chose to die.
And that's when I
said to myself, either
I'm going to go down here
and into despair and grief,
or I'm going to
do something that
helps give meaning to his life.
Because part of
the problem was he
had physicians who did not
see him as a human being.
When you're treating
cells and the patient
is like dying over here
because he's lost who he is,
this is not good medicine.
And I thought, why
does medicine not
care for the whole human being?
Why does it not care for
our emotions and our soul?
Because as we spent in the
first part of the program,
like that has so much bearing
on health and healing.
And so I said I know
everything about cancer cells
and not a thing about people
with cancer, their families.
And that's when I retrained,
and I got licensed
as a clinical psychologist.
And went back to work with
Herb Benson at Harvard
and opened a Mind Body clinic.
First for people with cancer
then for people with AIDS.
That was the very beginning
of the epidemic, Regina,
when you know there
were no drug cocktails.
People died often within a
month or two of diagnosis.
And then I opened
a clinic for people
with stress related disorders.
And I think that's a good
example of how when you're
severely shocked and
traumatized by something,
either you despair or you
remake your life, you transform.
And that's what resilience is.
And you did it.
I did do it.
And I've done it several times.
And I look back over
the course of my life
and all these awful things
are things that in the end,
you give a bow to life.
Like I'm clearly not in control.
This is nothing I ever
would have chosen.
And yet it shaped who
I am as a human being.
All those things have been such
teachers not only of resilience
but teachers of compassion.
And I think if we
take a look at what
spiritual and
psychological maturity are,
they come down to
the same thing.
That capacity to be
present in the moment,
the capacity to be kind.
A sense of compassion
a connection
to the whole of
life, and the ability
to receive the beauty of
life, the feast of life
with such great appreciation.
And that's what you learn.
And you really detailed a
lot of this in this book.
And now let's get into some
of the nuts and bolts of it.
Because interestingly
on one hand,
you're looking at a doctor
that comes in and says,
oh, I think you have cancer.
Well, maybe you do.
OK, and part of this
you're saying is you
have to be able to
embrace reality.
You have to be able to accept
what is in the beginning.
Don't try to lie to yourself.
Well, that has a lot of baggage
with it too on one level.
So maybe you can
clarify what it means
to accept what is
without being taken down
into a state of hopelessness.
Absolutely.
So for example resilience
has been studied.
Whether you're studying
prisoners of war or people
who've survived concentration
camps or people who've survived
illness or children who were
abused or companies by the way,
this is as true of
corporations as it is people.
You'll find that the basic
aspects of resilience,
let me just enumerate them,
and then we'll talk about them.
You talked about realism.
And we'll look at that.
But looking at reality squarely
and not making up fancy stories
that end up and denial.
The second is to have
faith in something,
a larger perspective that
stops you from putting
yourself in the box.
The third is radical creativity.
And I love that.
What does it like to
become radically creative.
Then you need the
support of other people.
You need mentors and allies.
And those are right up there.
And you need a good
sense of humor.
Life is absurd.
And if you can
see the absurdity,
you'll do a lot better.
So those are some
of the main things.
There are more.
But getting back to realism.
I call it optimizing realism.
And I'll give you an example.
For example, I have a friend
who is a green builder.
And in 2008 when the
recession started,
the bottom fell out
of green building.
There was no work.
And some of his friends,
said, look there's no work.
Do whatever you can.
Go get a job at Starbucks.
It'll cut down the burn
of the money at least.
And he kept saying, oh no,
I will think positively.
The world is going green.
I'm just going to
stay positive, and I'm
going to draw this to me.
And he ended up being
bankrupt and losing his home.
And that is
unrealistic optimism.
I mean that's really denial.
That's unrealistic thinking.
That's denial.
And I know a lot of
people, they think
that it's positive thinking,
but, in fact, it's denial.
It is most important that
you adjust your sails
to the prevalent winds.
You don't just expect
they're going to change
or complain about them.
You actually do something.
And that's important.
There was a wonderful
television special
that probably some of
your listeners saw,
and if you didn't, they
can take a look at it now.
It was a PBS special called
"This Emotional Life".
Oh, let me write that down.
OK, I haven't seen it.
It was eight hours.
Two, four hour segments.
Fantastic.
There was a great segment about
a POW who talked about realism.
They realized, the POW's
in this installation,
that unless they could
communicate with each other,
they were going to lose hope.
They would despair.
Become depressed.
That would be the end of them.
And so that realism allowed
them to optimize the situation
because they figured out a
tapping code so that they could
communicate with each other.
And that's what I mean.
You have to actually tune in
and be present to the situation.
And then, of course, the
creative part comes in.
But on that same note,
I read, and forgive me,
it may have been in your book.
I read a lot of books.
It was talking about that
same situation with POW's.
And the ones that actually
made it out of there
were the ones that accepted,
this is going to be a grind.
It's going to last for a while.
The ones that we're optimistic,
exceedingly optimistic--
Exactly.
Oh, we'll be out of
here by next week.
Kept going through one
kind of emotional setback
after another, after
another, till it wound them
down to the point
where some of them
never got out because
they simply didn't survive
physically and emotionally.
-That's right.
Because they were
disappointed over and over.
But when you say to yourself,
hey, they know we're here.
We'll be out by Christmas.
And Christmas comes and goes.
We'll be out by Thanksgiving,
we'll be out by New Year's.
We'll be--
I think that's a
wonderful example
of where we need to hold on
to what is genuinely real.
Let's talk about pessimism.
We've talked about optimism.
If I can share
just for a moment.
I was looking at
this, and I thought,
where do I fit into this?
Everybody thinks
I'm an optimist.
And I think I generally am
very resilient and an optimist.
But when I'm first
given some kind
of uncomfortable news or even
anything that involves change.
Change, whether it's good.
Change or whether
it's change that could
seem not good at face value.
The notion of change
frightens a lot of people.
And myself--
-It sure does.
My friends and family wouldn't
probably know this about me.
When I'm first confronted with
something, it's startling.
And I think, oh, I don't know.
I don't, I don't
know about that.
So my first reaction
is negative.
But within a few minutes, I'll
say, oh, I'll process through.
What could happen out of this.
I'm probably one of those
overly optimistic people
in denial a lot of time too.
But I'll usually
adapt pretty quickly.
But my first response is
also fearful and negative.
Yes.
So I understand that very well.
And you like me have changed the
brain circuitry so the old one
may kick in first.
But it doesn't last for long.
So pessimism.
There's a great deal
of research on it.
And one of the
prime investigators
is Marty Seligman,
who's a psychologist,
professor of psychology at the
University of Pennsylvania.
And he's also the father of
quote positive psychology.
And that merits
just a definition.
Because psychology used to
study what was wrong with you.
And it didn't study
what was right with you.
Like things like
what is resilience?
So positive psychology
looks at that aspect.
Pessimism and
optimism are really
based on your
explanatory style, which
means when something
bad happens, how
do you explain it to yourself?
That's the question.
-Explain that please.
OK.
An example.
My kids were teenagers.
We went out in a boat
for the first time.
We had just gotten a new boat.
My husband was away
for the weekend.
And I let the kids
talk me into going out.
We knew nothing about boating.
And we're going down the
river toward the ocean
on The East Coast.
And we see these
barrels floating.
Red ones, green ones.
I said what is the barrels?
We knew nothing.
We didn't know it.
They marked the
navigable channel.
On the way home, on
the way back up river,
after we'd been out in the
ocean, the tide was out.
And we were outside
the channel of barrels.
And we ran aground.
OK.
I've got three kids.
It's getting cold.
It's late in the afternoon.
We have run aground.
This is a minor stressful event.
How do I explain it to myself?
That's what
explanatory style is.
I explained it in terms of what
Seligman calls the three P's
of pessimism and helplessness.
That is first of all,
I took it personally.
You know this is
entirely my fault.
So there's self blame.
The second P is it's pervasive.
Because my internal dialogue
was going something like I'll
leave out the expletives
since this is television.
You're right.
Thank you.
It's like, oh drat.
We're stuck on a sandbar.
What kind of a stupid mother
who knows nothing about boating
takes their kids boating?
I know what kind of a stupid
mother, one who works.
My kids have never
gotten what they
needed because I've worked.
They will probably have to
go to therapy for 20 years.
And then I'm thinking,
you know, it's
so hard being a working mother.
These are the
things that happen.
And you know, I don't have
enough time with my husband.
Those are your first
kinds of thoughts?
This was it.
It's like all at
once these flood in.
Because they're so familiar.
They're all the ways that
we criticize ourselves.
Thus the word pervasive.
Pervasive.
Personal, pervasive, and
the third is permanent.
It's the story of your life.
You always end up like this.
And that's what Seligman
says is the definition
of the explanatory
style of a pessimist.
It's all my fault. I
mess up everything I do.
And it's the story of my life.
And so constantly if you look
at all the stories you've
told yourself over time
about why bad things happen,
if you're a pessimist, they will
all hang on that same thread.
And it's amazing.
You can change it.
You can dispute it.
And that is even if you're
an optimist, a lot of times
if you have a momentary
jolt to the system,
even if it lasts five
minutes or even a day,
for example, on
something, you can feel
like it's the end of the world.
Like it's never going to end.
I experience that.
I do have that feeling
from time to time.
Whatever is going on, if
it's negative, oh my god,
this is how it's going to be.
I'll find my way out of it.
But let's talk about how
you find your way out of it
quickly as we've learned to do.
-Yes.
Exactly.
The first thing you need to
do is to recognize you're
telling yourself a story.
It's not reality.
This is just the
programming of your brain.
You're wired from long
use for that circuit.
Of course, now we know all
about neural plasticity.
And we understand
that we develop
new circuitry as we get older.
And we develop it
through repetition.
So if you know what pessimism
is, now the listeners know.
-They can say I am or I am not.
-That's right.
When that thinking comes
up, you can say to yourself,
there it is.
That's pessimistic thinking.
That's the story
that I tell myself.
Let me tell myself
a different story.
the story of yeah,
this is a difficult thing now.
Nobody likes change.
But the fact of the matter
is when life crashes
the way we know it, I can
take this as a challenge
to reinvent myself.
And you can.
And that's not the kind of
optimism that keeps you stuck.
What we understand
about stress hardiness
is this is now the work
of Suzanne Willett Cobasa
that people who are
hardy against stress
have this explanatory style.
Something difficult
happens, they say,
cool it's a challenge.
When we were on that sandbar,
my 14-year-old son Justin
was thrilled.
He was thrilled.
I couldn't believe it.
He said, best day
of my whole life.
Because now I get to rescue us.
So for him, he had the
stress hardy thing.
It was a challenge.
When you're stress hardy.
You also know something
about control.
You stick to what
you can control,
and let go of what you can't.
So that you put your energy
where it can make a difference.
And the third thing
is you maintain
a commitment to sticking
with whatever the problem is.
You stay engaged.
Because pessimist will
tend to turn the other way.
They don't like conflict.
Or they don't like this or that.
Or they're having a dispute
with somebody at work,
you have to be engaged
and hang in there.
Well, let me ask
you about that.
Would you say that
pessimists would often
turn to say prescription
drugs or something
to basically blunt the pain
and just turn the other cheek.
Is that a common defense
if you are a pessimist.
I think it's a
very common defense.
Because what happens is that
you're set up to feel helpless
and what Seligman discovered
is that a very, a very good
explanation of how at
least some subset of people
ends up depressed is they slide
from pessimism into depression.
And, of course, you
know if you're in pain,
isn't it human to
want to feel better.
Sure.
So you'll go for cigarettes,
you'll go for alcohol.
You'll go for--
-Ice cream.
Prescription drugs.
Yes, all the good things.
And put on a lot of weight.
What we found, what the
research is on adverse childhood
experiences, and kids who've
had a hard time as children
you can quantify that
on a scale from one
to six adverse experiences.
The ones who have a high level
are much more likely to be
depressed later in their life.
And they're much more likely
to be substance abusers.
There's no question about it.
But they're also much more
likely to be overweight.
So in addition to the problems
we have with the food supply--
So were trying to comfort
ourselves on all levels.
We're trying to
comfort ourselves.
Exactly.
Well, let's talk
about engaging our
create-- we have to be flexible.
We have to engage our
creativity as well.
And a lot of people don't
know what that feels like.
Because they have been
feeling like they're
victim of circumstance.
How do you reengage
your creativity
if you haven't been using it.
Say, you've lost your job, and
now you're really feeling like,
oh my god, I'm whatever age.
Nobody's going to hire me.
There are no jobs out there.
And you're really
starting to feel helpless.
How do you start reengaging?
And maybe give us a couple of
cool little stories of people
who have said, heck, with that.
I'm going to make
something happen, and did.
Well, you know I remember
a story of a patient I had,
not in this recession,
but in one in the 1980's.
And he had been an
engineer, and there
weren't jobs in engineering.
And he started out thinking of
you know, pessimism, pessimism.
I'll never get a job here.
And then he said,
well, maybe I'll
never get a job as an engineer.
What would I rather do?
What have I always wanted to do?
That is the beauty
of these times.
Many people are having
that opportunity.
Yes.
That's it.
And he said, I'm already broke.
So I'll take out a student loan.
And he actually
went back to school
and he became a marriage
and family therapist.
And it was a
complete turn around.
Because that's the question.
Creativity is all about
getting out of the box.
And so if you
engage other people,
that's a way of
getting out of the box.
It's lovely.
Get together with a group of
five or six trusted friends.
And say, OK, I'm
going to say my piece.
This is how I feel.
This is what is happening.
And invite people then
to respond to you.
Not necessarily by
giving you advice.
But sometimes it's
the littlest thing.
Somebody responds to
your emotional tone.
And it kicks up an
idea that's different.
But isn't this aspect just
in itself not being alone.
Just engaging other people and
not being so proud as to say,
oh, I don't want to
bore anyone with it.
I don't them the know I'm
freaking out over this.
We have to be humble
in this situation.
Don't we?
-We do.
We have to be humble.
And support is everything.
There's a huge-- you know
it's like we know all this.
And yet I say, oh, well
here's the literature.
We know that friends
make us feel better.
And there's an enormous
research literature
that when we are supported
by other friends,
we have a stronger
immune system.
Our cardiovascular
system is better.
Our thinking process is clearer.
Yes, and you know
joint creativity.
Yes.
Exactly.
That is such a profound
component of this.
Is just be humble
enough to get together
with your friends or family
members that love you
and start seeing how-- get
some of their creative input
as to how you might be able
to fashion yourself if you
can't see it for yourself.
-Yes, exactly.
And the other thing is
you've got to put your brain
in a position to be creative.
So if you're sitting around,
and you're depressed.
And you know you've got the
squirrel on the wheel going
around and round and
round, the easiest way
to get out of it is
to move, to exercise.
Yes.
It was turns out that's
almost the panacea
for depression, for pessimism,
for everything else.
And if you can
exercise in nature.
A gym is way better
than nothing.
It's great for you.
But if you can combine, you
don't have to be an athlete,
but walk briskly in nature.
The beauty of nature will
draw you into the moment.
Anything that draws
you into the moment
and out of the
obsessive thinking
is going to help
you with creativity.
So meditation is
another way to do that.
But if you're really upset,
most people unless they're
really skilled meditators--
That's a hard thing to do.
It's a hard thing to do.
Because you are pray
to your mental woes.
Right and your worry is still
sitting at your side there.
Your worry is there.
OK, let's talk
because we only have--
Try yoga though.
Move.
Yoga is great.
I'm with you on that.
Yoga and walking.
Let's talk about
humor for a second.
You like the joke
a day thing, right?
So really I mean if
you can't meditate,
then why not go to
a joke a day site?
Right.
Yes, you can do that.
Or go look up the website of
my good friend Loretta Laroche,
L.A.R.O.C.H.E. She's
done seven PBS specials.
She's a humorist.
And her field is
positive psychology.
She is just a riot.
And you find, boy,
did my mood change.
And we know, it affects
the brain as well
as it affects your attitude.
What could be better?
-Yes.
OK.
And it gets all those
wonderful neurochemicals going.
The feel good chemicals.
So now let's talk about really
the big overlay which is we
have to have higher
meaning to our lives.
And you touched on it earlier.
Yes.
That's huge.
For example, Victor Frankl
in the concentration camp
said, he said, this, he
said, this experience,
if I survive this, I'm
going to go out and teach
people about resilience.
I'm going to make meaning out
of this terrible experience
that I have.
And you know
inadvertently that's what
I did after my father died.
Because of the side effects
of the cancer treatment.
I thought, I have
to make meaning out
of this if I'm going
to live with it,
I have to change
the story of it.
Do you know that every
single time before I
give a lecture on
mind body medicine,
I dedicate it to my father.
Because I realize
that without him,
I'd probably still be
working with petri dishes.
And we all find meaning
in a different way.
When I go through a difficult
time now, for example,
I look at it in
terms of OK, I've
been doing these spiritual
practices for a lifetime.
And I'm getting a little
closer to understanding
what surrender is.
And I think this is a
really good practice.
I'm going to practice
surrender here
to the unfolding future knowing
that I cannot control it.
And just that very attitude will
change your neural chemistry.
And so much more
you've written about.
And I want to encourage people
to pick up a copy of this.
This is a wonderful--
this is a little book,
but it's packed with wisdom.
And now that everybody's had
a chance to get to know you
a bit, you can see
that you certainly
have I think you've earned
our respect as a guide
through this.
And I very much appreciate
all the hard work
you've done in this field.
Thank you, Regina.
Thank you for bringing this
out in such a wonderful way.
Thank you, my dear.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.